---
title: 'Pet Ownership and Zen (or Stoicism)'
subtitle: ''
category: thoughts
---

I have a dog. A beautiful and elegant (you should see it walking or trotting) mix of dalmatian with something else. Because it's a big dog, it is essential that it be well behaved otherwise it could break everything in our house. Plus, we don't want to risk it not being obedient when a stranger (to him) comes into our house. His name is Pongo btw (I know, not at all original). Considering that, we hired a trainer to come help us initially with how to best approach training Pongo, and how to know what to watchout for in regards to the training. This is all to introduce this one thing the trainer said in one of the "classes". I'm paraphrasing, because I didn't record it and my memory sucks, but it was something like this:

> I love having dogs, and the idea of having dogs, not because of the whole "companionship" and "love" thing, which I think is kinda BS, but what I think is really incredible about having dogs is that they help you to become the best version of yourself.

He went on to specify that training a dog is finding a balance between strong leadership and patience and grace.

## Zen

Altough I'm not a religious person (nor am I a spiritual person in general), I've always found the more philosophical part of buddhism, in particular of zen-buddhism, to be very interesting. From my limited understanding, this has an immense overlap with the philosopy of the stoics, but buddhism gets a lot more mainstream-hype. One of the main aspects of both these philosophies (zen-buddhism and stoicism, that is), is about learning that things are not what we expect them to be, and knowing how to let go of those expectations and enjoy them for what they are. I'm probably over-simplifying this, I'm no zen master, but from my understanding based on reading buddhist masters and some stoic philosophers is this. Once we realize that things are not what we expect, or want, them to be, we can begin to let go of those expectations, which stop us from truly appreciating the thing as it is. It's how if we participate in a game of trivia and we're expecting to win, and we want to be the person who knows the most useless knowledge, we might experience a second place as a deeply negative thing, whereas a person might be dead-last and completely enjoy the experience because by not getting bothered by the things they couldn't answer they are free to be amazed by the things the other players knew that they didn't.

Another big thing from zen and stoicism is the idea that our reactions are ours and ours alone. Stoics would say that there are things that are outside our control, but our *reaction* to them is within it. From this idea, I believe, sparks the notion that is quite associated with buddhism that we have to learn to let go of our negative reactions. A person who follows zen might say that holding on to anger is something that only does harm to ourselves, and nothing more.

## Pet Ownership

Frustration-induced anger is, I believe, somewhat common among pet owners. It is impossible to never get angry when you just need your dog to do something very simple, or for him not to do the same thing for the millionth time after you've just told it a million times not to do it. This kind of feeling isn't uncommon towards other people either. But when you feel this way towards other people you might rationalize some justification for it. People have a better understanding of cause-and-effect than a dog, so they can much more easily associate their actions with your response; in fact it might even "pay off" if the person realizes that they've done something that offended you and try to make it right with you. With a pet, however, you're left with the truest realization of the idea that when you're holding on to anger it's you and you alone who carry it: after your dog has gone up on the table to try and steal some food for the millionth time, when you get frustrated and frustration turns to anger, two minutes later, when the dog comes to put its head on your lap, it has no idea that you might be frustrated-angry, and even if it does it cannot correlate this emotional state with its own actions two minutes earlier. If you decide to give it the cold treatment it will have no idea of what's going on. You're carrying that negativity all by yourself, and you're also the only person who can end it by letting go: your dog isn't going to pick up on it and do something to fix it.

Your dog is also not going to be exactly what you expect of it. It is also not going to have any idea that it isn't what you expect it to be (like maybe a kid eventually will). You just have to deal with that, and learn to love it for what it is, and not what you want it to be, because otherwise *you* will just live your life with the dog in frustration, and this will affect them without them ever understanding why.